Amen, please be seated.
Indeed, great is the faithfulness of our Lord.
And as we begin the
the chapters of Joshua that become very difficult and we wonder how we might glean anything from these things.
We need to be reminded that the very basic idea from chapters really 12 and onward through the divvying out of the land, so to speak, that the theme, the melody of this is that God is faithful, that God is faithful.
And yet even in chapter 12, we find this rehearsal or this recapping of how God has been faithful to his people.
And what we find here is something like a laundry list and an itemized list of all the kings that Israel has defeated.
In fact, what we find in chapter 12 is the promise kept that God made back all the way on the other side of the Jordan in the days of Moses.
that God would remain faithful to his promises, and he would give the land unto his people.
And so in chapter 12, we find this itemized rehearsal of king after king after king after king that has succumbed to the sword of Yahweh.
And it is the Israelites who are the instruments of God's judgment, and it shows forth God's faithfulness.
And yet in chapter 12, we also see that it shows forth God's
holiness.
We'll see that here shortly.
But I want to make a quick note about this passage before we jump into this Scripture reading and please be gracious with me as we read through chapter 12.
Okay.
We'll wall do our best and only read it out loud, but to consider it as we read it with our eyes.
But chapter 12, you'll notice that there is both considered the kings defeated by Moses and the kings defeated by Joshua.
One of the themes that we saw, especially in the beginning of this book was the question of whether the tribes, the trans-Jordan tribes would rise to the call to go to battle with their brethren.
with the rest of Israel.
Would Israel be united?
Or would they be split, as it were, by the Jordan River?
And so chapter 12 rehearses for us that God's promises didn't begin only as the Jordan was split and God's people walked into the promised land, put their feet on dry ground.
But we see that begin way back.
in the wilderness.
And so there is a unifying aspect to chapter 12 that both God's provision in Canaan and in the lands giving to the two and a half tribes of the trans-Jordan tribes that they are one.
Israel is one.
So before we read this passage and recount of God's faithfulness to his people, let us pray.
Would you pray with me please?
Father, we asked that you would indeed
Grant us wisdom from on high that you would soften our hearts before you, O Lord, that we might consider grand, glorious, and even hard truths.
And so, Lord, would it be that we would see you as perfect in all of your ways, indeed holy and righteous, just, and yet good and long-suffering and loving towards your people?
Lord, help us to
Listen, oh God, give us ears to hear and hearts to love you all the more in minds to even bow down before you, oh Lord, to submit to you.
And we pray and ask these things in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Okay, this is God's word, beginning in verse one.
We won't do this
continually throughout the rest of the divvying of the land, but we will read chapter 12.
This is God's word, holy, inspired, and errant, and beneficial for you and me.
Let's give here.
Now these are the kings of the land whom the people of Israel defeated and took possession of their land beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise from the valley of the Arnon to Mount Herman.
With all the Arabah, eastward,
Sion, king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshban and ruled from Eryor, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon.
And from the middle of the valley, as far as River Jettic, the boundary of the Ammonites that is half of Gilead, and the Ereba to the sea of Chenarath, eastward, and in the direction of Beth Jeshemoth, to the sea of the Araba, the Salt Sea, southward to the foot of the slopes of Pisgah.
And Og, king of Bayshen, one of the remnant of the Refaim, who lived at the Astoroth and at Edry, and ruled over Mount Herman and Salica, and all Bayshen to the boundary of the Geshurites and the Macathites, and over the half of Gilead to the boundary of Zion, king of Heshban.
Moses, the servant of the Lord and the people of Israel, defeated them,
And Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave their land for possession to the Rubenites and to the Gadites and the half tribe of Manessa.
And these are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the people of Israel defeated on the west side of the Jordan from Baal, God, in the Valley of Lebanon to Mount Halek that rises towards Seir.
And Joshua gave their land to the tribes of Israel as a possession according to their allotments.
In the hill country in the low land,
and the Arabah, and the slopes, and the wilderness, and in the Negeb, the land of the Hittites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the parasites, the Hittites, and the Jebusites.
The king of Jericho, one.
The king of I, which is beside Bethel, one.
The king of Jerusalem, one.
The king of Hebron, one.
The king of Jarmuth, one.
The king of Lahish.
One.
The king of Eglon.
The king of Gazer.
One.
The king of Debeir.
The king of Gator.
One.
The king of Horma.
The king of Arad.
One.
The king of Libna.
The king of Adulam.
One.
The King of Makeda, one.
The King of Bethel, one.
The King of Tapua, one.
The King of Hethair, one.
The King of Aethek, one.
The King of Lasharan, one.
The King of Maidan, one.
The King of Hazar, one.
The King of Shimbran, Meiran, one.
The king of Aksheth, one.
The king of Ta'anak, one.
The king of Megiddo, one.
The king of Kedesh, one.
The king of Jokneum, in Carmel, one.
The king of Dor, and Nathanth, Dor, one.
The king of Goyim, in Galilee, one.
The king of Terza, one.
In all.
31 Kings.
For the grass withers and the flower falls, the word of our God stands forever and ever.
Thanks be to God.
If you ever doubt the Lord has a sense of humor, imagine providentially us coming to chapter 12 on daylight savings time, right?
But what we find before us in chapter 12, again, we won't do this in the distribution of the land as we get there in the coming
Opportunities that I have to preach we won't get there or we won't read through this but this is a taste of what we find in historical narrative and We wonder Pastor what in the world does this mean?
For me, but did you hear it?
I mean even as you read it out loud I think it's helpful Which is why we did it to read it out loud to consider how this is an itemized?
account of what the Lord has done for his people.
You get the sense that there's this divine list that Joshua has before the people, and he's checking them off one by one by one.
And with every mark, with every jot and tittle, we are reminded that God is faithful to his people.
I'm reminded of this quote
as we come to this passage by Thomas Watson, he says, if God has made a promise of mercy to his people, he will be so far from coming short of his word that he will be better than his word.
He often does more than he has said, nevertheless, he is abundant in truth, and the Lord may sometimes delay a promise
But he will not deny it.
Having given his bond and do time the money will be paid."
This quote likely captures a sentiment that we all know too well, perhaps some of us more than others.
that we speak of God's faithfulness to His promises and grand sweeping, redemptive categories, right in Christ's incarnation and His active and passive obedience and His suffering upon the cross and His resurrection and present reigning in the new, redemptive age to come that it has been ushered in by the pouring out of the Holy Spirit and that one still to come, that promised age when Christ returns and make all things new.
And if we're honest with ourselves, we often feel as if we're dying of thirst in this world and all we have before us is the Niagara Falls and we're trying to take a drink from it.
We wrestle with the application of these grand truths, believing in ultimate things and finding contentment in them, especially when the present age tests and tries our faith.
We hear and we are reminded of and we take seriously these grand truths
But sometimes in the throes of waiting upon the Lord, we have a hard time differentiating as, or between as Watson says, a delayed promise and a denied promise.
Sometimes they feel like one of the same, don't they?
Or to put it more plainly, right in our grief, we wrestle with the hope of the resurrection.
In our hunger, we wrestle with the promise of daily bread.
When we're sick, we wonder at the great physician what he might do.
In the face of tragedy or present horrors, we wonder at the Lord's sovereign power to do all his holy will.
If you ever ask the question of yourself, what is God doing?
We'll far from pointless
or useless to the believer, Joshua 12 instructs us to consider the Lord, is always at work to keep his promises, that the Lord will always vindicate his holiness, and the Lord will always redeem his people.
Joshua 12 instructs us to consider the Lord will always work to keep his promises, he will always vindicate his holiness, and he will always redeem his people.
And so our first point this morning, I want to consider,
is that chapter 12 is a testament to God's faithfulness.
Chapter 12 is a testament to God's faithfulness.
He keeps his promises.
I wonder if you're one of those rare and special people who can go to the grocery store without a shopping list.
You as this rare special person can walk up and down the aisle for getting nothing.
Never calling home to check if there's something in the fridge or in the pantry or putting something unnecessary or extraneous in your cart.
And if that is you, I am jealous of you because that does not describe me.
Maybe like you, I need a grocery list.
I need the checklist on the notes app or something written on a list or list written on a scrap piece of paper.
And even then you can ask Megan and she can attest to this.
I still forget things.
and I still get distracted and I still need to call home to ask questions.
And again, what's before us is a divinely inspired and orchestrated checklist recounting the faithfulness of God to keep his promises.
And in fact, if we were to read this list again, we'd note that God's faithfulness extends to the days prior to Joshua by concerning the land reserved for the trans-Jordanian tribes under Moses.
But in reality, this promise finds its roots much earlier
is specifically in the promise that God made with Abraham.
In chapter 12 of the book of Genesis, the Lord called Abram out of the land of Ur, and as he passed through Canaan, God promised him to your offspring, I will give this land.
In chapter 13, he reiterates this promise as Abram and Lot separate.
The Lord said to Abram after Lot had separated from him
Lift up your eyes and look from the place where you are, northward and southward and eastward and westward.
For all the land that you see, I will give to you and to your offspring forever.
I will make your offspring as the dust of the earth so that if one can count the dust of the earth, your offspring also can be counted.
Arise, walk through the length and the breadth of the land, for I will give it to you.
And you might recall that the perceived issue wasn't with the inheritance of the land, but the promise that Abraham would have the offspring to possess it.
And so he reaffirms his promise, not only swearing by his own name and promising his own destruction should he fail to keep it, covenanting with Abram.
He also gives him a sign to remind Abram and his offspring that he will indeed give them the land that he has promised.
But from Genesis 12 to 17, God reaffirms this promise five times, I will give you the land.
And so when we consider the laundry list of kings, conquered in Joshua chapter 12, what we find is a yes and amen to the promise made hundreds of years prior to Abraham.
And is this not the definition of what appears from our perspective to be
a delayed promise.
Dale Ralph Davis challenges us to consider our perspective of these verses.
He says, right, these verses do not drip with tedium.
They tangle with excitement.
The king of Tapua won, the king of Hephaer won.
Those words are not an excerpt from a dull archive.
They are lyrics of a song.
Verses 7 through 24, Davis says, constitute the stanzas for Israel's version of great is thy faithfulness.
Yahweh's ancient word has proven faithful.
And so at the beginning of Joshua, right, we considered the promise of God to provide for them the land.
And here in chapter 12, we rehearse it.
We see how God had been faithful and consider the historical situation of Joshua, if you will,
What separates the conquest of the land from the promise that God made to Abraham?
Was it not 400 years of slavery?
400 years of oppressive labor and toiling under the evil taskmaster of Pharaoh?
Wasn't it wondering in the wilderness as the previous generation, including Moses, who died, not entering into the promised land, wondering if God would actually fulfill His promises?
Looking back at Egypt and wondering if perhaps maybe slavery was better than the life they had been granted or given?
You see, it's hardship and suffering and wondering at what the Lord might be doing that we find between the promise made to Abraham and this completion of the giving of the land.
And yet chapter 12 reminds us of the Lord.
is in fact keeping his promises.
He is faithful and beloved are you this day differentiating between a delayed promise and a denied promise.
Well here our passage this day and rejoice that God is faithful.
He will surely do it.
He will meet your needs.
He will provide for you in the ways that you need.
And might it be that we recount not only in our own lives, but through the entirety of the Scriptures, how God has been faithful to His Word.
But secondly, what I want you to see in a little bit more in detail this morning is we do find a rehearsal of sin's consequences.
In our passage, we find a rehearsal of sin's consequences for He in fact, vindicates His holiness.
He vindicates his holiness.
This chapter upholds another aspect of the promise made to Abraham.
And even colors in what we might call the promise delayed.
How do we understand the 400 plus years of the people waiting and toiling?
In fact, in light of our previous point, we might wonder if a promise delayed is not indicative of the Lord being slow to hear the cries of His people, or maybe outright plainly ignoring them.
Well, the culmination of the conquest in chapter 12 should point us back again to that promise that the Lord made with Abraham.
When the Lord promises the land to Abraham's offspring, he says, and they shall come back here in the fourth generation, meaning his offspring.
God tells Abraham that much time will pass.
He promises this, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete.
The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete.
And again, the divine shopping list of sorts of kings defeated and put to the sword here points forward to this.
All the more, these are figureheads of their people just as David will be of Israel.
And so when we read of the kings of the promised land being put to death, what echoes is the command of the Lord to devote everything to destruction.
For the kings are put to death and so are their people.
The command is read and is rehearsed in the Pentateuch.
Men, women, children, and their possessions.
They shall not stand, they shall not live.
And so the issue isn't whether the Lord is faithful to keep His promises.
We see this, but how do we square such a promise made with the Lord's goodness, with His justice, and with His holiness?
And we consider this a little bit at the beginning of the outside of the book of Joshua.
But here we find the promise kept and the promise completed.
And so it's good for us to revisit again.
You know, Richard Dawkins famously claimed that the God of the Bible is the God who was arguably the most unpleasant character in all of fiction.
Dawkins calls him jealous and proud of it.
Petty, unjust, and an unforgiving control freak.
A vindictive bloodthirsty
ethnic cleanser, a misogynistic, homophobic, racist, infanticidal, genocidal, philicidal, pestilential, megalomaniac, sadomasochistic, capriciously malevolent bully.
Now, that's an impressive vocabulary, isn't it?
But is it true?
Is it true?
Would we want a faithful God who keeps that sort of promise?
For what we are seeing here is that Dawkins isn't merely saying that God is a divine troll, but he's making a moral claim upon him.
It is this true.
Well, I think we have responses as Christians, and while we can't be exhausted with everything here, let's take a look at some of these things.
Well, first, I want you to consider the nature of the created order.
consider the nature of the created order.
As Christians, we believe that God created the Bible tells us that God created all things by the word of His power and created it all very good.
At the very least, we need to understand that the Canaanites had no more claim to the land than the Israelites did.
In fact, none of us have claimed to our own land, regardless of what your deeds may say,
And regardless of what nation's founding documents may say, the Bible tells us that the earth and everything in it, the world and its inhabitants belong to the Lord.
This is as true today as it was in the days of Joshua.
Beloved, the earth is still the Lord's and all that is in it.
It is the Lord's to give and grant or take or remove.
And when we consider this in a lot of the Old Testament narrative, we see that the Israelites were themselves, right, dispossessed of their own land.
Were they not conquered and taken into exile?
And was it not Babylon that was the instrument of God's judgment against His people from turning away from Him?
Wasn't it God who sent the Babylonians to conquer them?
See, the issue here isn't fairness.
There is no one who escapes God's judgment.
Even God's own people would be subject to his own judgments and have been before the exile.
See, the Lord does not ignore the sins of his people while keeping a record of others.
In fact, it's the same grace given to the Hebrews as to the Canaanites.
When the Lord promised that time would pass,
before Abraham's offspring would inherit the land.
He says that the transgressions of the amorites, the iniquities of the amorites have not been made complete.
There is a sense where God is being forbearing, and He is being long-suffering.
And we see in the book of Jonah, for example, that God's enemies can become those who love the Lord and repent of their sins and trust in God.
Or we look to Rahab.
But secondly, well, firstly, we need to see that the land belongs to God and not to the Israelites and not to the Canaanites.
So it is God's divine right and it is God's divine purpose to provide the land for whom he will.
Second, I think Dawkins and others mischaracterize the Lord's intent and the effect of imposing the command to devote to destruction.
Right, we ask the question, right, and many do.
Right, is this genocide, pastors?
Is that what God is commanding of his people?
Is it genocide?
Right, were the Israelites here called to hunt down every hitite and parasite and Jebusite and so forth and to vote them to destruction?
Right, is this the stuff of the Third Reich?
Well, we know that's not true, right?
It can't be true for the simple fact that Rahab and her family were spared
and that they belong to God's people, right?
And so were the Gibeonites.
And notice that even Rahab was revered in the days and years to come and preserved for us in Hebrews chapter 11, nonetheless.
It can't be that God is commanding genocide for how could Rahab belong to God's people.
In fact, you know that a mixed multitude that God is always in the business of welcome in those who would become Yahwehites.
Go read the book of Ruth.
And so we go back and we read the progression of the campaign into the Promised Land.
The Hebrews destroyed Jericho, which was a fortified city and military outpost.
They repel coalesced forces in the south and the north.
And notice the fact of this command and it's working out in the book of Joshua is decidedly militaristic and arguably defensive.
It appears that we have described for us not extermination,
but dispossession.
And I think this is an important distinction we need to make.
It's not extermination, but a dispossession.
In fact, both words for dispossession and destruction occur not only in Joshua, but throughout the first five books of the Bible.
And commentators know that the phrase to dispossess occurs three times more often than the phrase to devote to destruction.
And I agree with commentators that this is the effect of the campaign, right?
How often is it in the book of Joshua that we read of the reputation of the Lord?
The people have heard of what the Lord is doing and has done.
And what do people do when they hear of a coming destruction?
Well, they tend to flee.
And there are a number of instances where this appears to be the typical means to which God uses the Israelites to clear the land out before them.
Even the language of total destruction appears to be rhetorical and illustrative.
We'll read in chapter 13 that people still remain who have not been driven out.
And so I think we can read of these instances as references to a total success of the Israelites under Joshua's leadership to inherit the land.
They had been faithful.
Let me attempt to summarize what this means.
We tend to confuse the command to devote to destruction as the means to which the land is to be conquered.
What's the best way to take the land for yourself, this line of reasoning goes?
Well, we think it's to kill every man, to kill every woman, and to kill every child.
And I think this confuses the nature of the command to devote to destruction.
But we overemphasize the people being devoted to destruction and underestimate the things being devoted to destruction.
One scholar makes a note that should the cities be mostly in view here, as I think they may be, this is those places where the Israelites focused their destruction.
So this is in contrast to what we might call
the sticks or the rural parts of the land of Canaan.
It appears that where there is conflict in the Promised Land, it is usually around fortified cities and usually against impending armies.
And so this commentator says that the masses lived in hamlets and other places nearby these forts.
The forts themselves contain the palace and the royal storehouses for taxes and kind, temples,
and more.
These cities were not the home of non-elites or non-combatants.
Rather, they represented the leadership, the military, and those most involved with the oppression of the rulership of the land.
It could be that by and large, the destruction that took place was reserved for places in armories of war and centers for pagan worship and store houses for wealth and for others, while the general populace was to be driven out.
I don't think this fully addresses our qualms, does it?
With such a command.
But as we consider God's holiness and justice to execute judgment against sin, let us make sure we're rightly understanding and correctly just what the Lord commanded of Israel in this war to which Israel undertook.
But also, let us be careful not to defang or to declaw God's wrath against sin.
and his utter ability and his utter right to uphold his justice and his just judgments.
For what we have here isn't an attempt to soften the command to devote to destruction, but rather to understand it in its proper context.
For still, the Lord called for whatever remained to be destroyed.
And how can that be?
No doubt, the command was carried out
And vast swaths of Canaanites, likely men, women, and children, and all their possessions were put to the sword and destroyed.
How can this be that such a command could be given by a loving and good God?
Well, believers, they simply deserved it.
They simply deserved God's just judgment.
God had given them over 400 years to repent and to turn to Yahweh, and yet we only have record of Rahab, and the Gibeonites, though their way isn't necessarily lauded or commended in the Scriptures.
The Canaanites deserved their destruction.
They were, in fact, murderous child sacrifices to their God.
They were known for their temple prostitution, for engaging in bestiality and incest, and a host of other things, really no pastor wants to mention from the pulpit.
They were violent, and they were pests, and they were destructive to the world around them.
They were barbarous, violent, and quick to raid and invade.
There would have been a people we would have contacted our elected officials to address and do something about.
And they were people.
The Israelites were to have no part or place.
And so it's not genocide that we have here.
It's a means by which God would protect and preserve his people that they would not go as the Canaanites go.
They would not go after their gods and do as they do and live as they lives.
Even the law is given in the Pentateuch to address this possessing of the land in a way.
But the point here is that they deserve this judgment and the Lord said so.
In fact, the moral laws given again in Leviticus 18 are in some ways a reference to the Canaanites.
Don't be like those you're going to drive out.
The Lord says they were wicked people who deserve God's judgment.
And God and His holiness and justice use the Israelites to be his sword.
Friends, they deserved it.
And yet there's a perspective here that I think that we must ponder as we consider the just judgment against the Canaanites.
They deserved it.
But beloved, don't we?
Don't we?
Now, take a breath.
I'm not comparing you to an ancient Canaanite.
Don't misunderstand me.
But while some sins may be more heinous before the sight of God than others, all sins are still deserving of God's wrath and God's judgment.
And I think the question should be not, how could a holy and loving God command the judgments and wrath against the Canaanites?
But why haven't I received the same just condemnation, received the same wrath being poured out?
And this brings us to our last point for in chapter 12, we see a shadow of Christ's suffering.
for he redeems as people.
We see a shadow of Christ suffering.
All right, that just as the judgment of these kings and their people are their deserving end for wickedness, for the wages of sin is death, is this not that to which Jesus himself submitted in our stead?
Have you considered that you and I are deserving of the same fate as the Canaanites or it not for the grace of God?
I mean, Paul himself reminds the Corinthians of the nature of God's justifying act and his sanctifying work, but he doesn't ignore what they were.
In verse 9, he says,
Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God?
Do not be deceived, neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality, nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkers, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God, and such were some of you.
But you were washed and you were sanctified.
You were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the spirit of our God.
You see, sin requires
the payment of death.
And chapter 12 teaches us this poignantly that sin requires death.
And yet this should point you and I to the one who suffered and died in our stead.
That Paul tells us for one will scarcely die for a righteous person, though perhaps for a good person one would dare Eve to die.
But God shows his love for us and that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
Since therefore we have now been justified by his blood,
how much more will we be saved by Him from the wrath of God?
You see, the backdrop of this passage is the sin and wickedness of the Canaanites, but it's not just a Canaanite problem, it's humanity's problem.
Since Adam, and before we shake our fist at the Lord and scoff at the claims of the Lord, it's not only utter this command, but to see it brought to completion, let us consider why we might receive or might not receive this just judgment.
and marvel at God's grace for sinners like you and for me.
Might we be given wisdom to fear the Lord?
And might we fear the Lord as we are granted wisdom?
And might it encourage us all the more to proclaim the grace of God for sinners, to all who adhere and to any who would listen that they might escape the coming judgment of the wrath to come.
I'm gonna end with this beloved.
The good news is that I think through the death of Christ here in this passage,
we hold the resurrection, or we behold the resurrection of the subsequent victory.
Death is Christ's means of waging war against Satan and death and defeating it forever.
And I think again, dare I say this is helpful to us when he concludes this concerning chapter 12.
He says this, the victory of Yahweh, or the victory Yahweh achieved over Sihan and Og and the Canaan's kings, is both a preview
and a pledge of that time when the kingdom of the world will become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever and ever.
Every one of Yahweh's victories over his enemies in the process of history is a partial portrayal of his victory over his enemies, at the consummation of history.
This is meant to steal and strengthen his suffering people as they long for that grand finale.
Beloved are you?
this day, trying to decide or differentiate between a promise delayed and a promise denied.
Well, we look to Christ and His resurrection.
We look to every victory that God has granted His people throughout the entirety of the Scriptures.
And we are reminded that He is faithful.
His judgments will be made sure.
They will be known.
And His grace will abound for sinners like you and me who have been saved and have been purchased by the blood.
Have you believed upon Christ?
Will you be spared from this coming judgment?
You can be, and you will be.
Christ simply calls us to repent of our sins, to believe upon Christ, and to love Him alone.
If you're not done so, would you do so today?
Less we receive the same fate of the Canaanites, and that we might know destruction and death, and God's judgment forever.
Let's pray.
Father, thank You that You would not mince words, O Lord, that You would not sugarcoat what ails the human race.
O Lord, that You would speak plainly of sin, and that You would show forth Your goodness, and we give You praise for Your holy and righteous God.
And Father, we thank You that You would see fit to crush Your Son on our behalf, that He might take the wrath we deserve upon His shoulders.
that we might receive his righteousness, that we might be counted as righteous in your sight, that we might be engrafted into your people and be as children to you.
And so we pray that you would, in matters regarding this, understanding your holiness and your righteousness, might we never fail to look to the cross as we seek to understand these things and wrap our heads around this.
For it's there that justice was metted and poured out.
And so God help us to see you now, help us to behold the cross.
And we ask this in Christ's name.
Amen.
Let's stand together and sing.